#Intro to the command line

Welcome! The command line can be one of the most powerful ways to interact with
a variety of computer systems, but it can also be a little confusing at first
glance. This mini-crash-course should help familiarize you with the basics of
command line usage and navigation.


## Who am I?

Time to get started! You likely know your username since you've just logged in,
but sometimes you may have multiple accounts with slight variations on a
username.

First, please open up a terminal using the menu in the upper-left corner (on Red
Hat) and selecting

> Applications -> System Tools -> Terminal

You can always ask the terminal who you are by entering

```Bash
whoami
```

and hitting \<Enter\>. (From now on, after typing in a command, just hit
\<Enter\> unless we tell you otherwise.)

![whoami](./images/1.whoami.gif)

##Where am I?

We know who we are, time to find out *where* we are. You can always find out
what folder you're in by using the "print working directory" command, or `pwd`.
Try it out!

```Bash
pwd
```

![pwd](./images/2.pwd.gif)

We're in our home directory. This is the base directory for a regular user in
Linux. In the SEAS labs, the home directory is always `/home/seas/<username>`.
If you're using your own Linux machine, the home directory is probably
`/home/<username>`. If you're on a Mac, the home directory is
`/Users/<username>` (they like to be different).

##What's in here?

We know who we are and where we are, now it's time to figure out what's in here.
We use the "list" command, `ls`, to view any files or directories that are in
the current folder.

```Bash
ls
```

![ls](./images/3.ls.gif)

The items you see above in the gif are all folders. They're the usual folders
created by default in Red Hat Linux. Your home folder is actually the same
folder as your Titan network drive on Windows, so you may have other files and
folders in your home directory.

##How do I go there?

To navigate to a new folder, we use the change directory command, `cd`, followed
by the name of the folder. While you *can* type out the full folder name, it's
usually nicer to use what's called Tab-completion.

Let's change to the `Pictures` directory. Type `cd Pi` and then hit the TAB key
to complete the directory name. Then hit \<Enter\>

Now you're in the `Pictures` directory. It's probably empty, but you can check
with `ls`.

To go back to your home directory, type `cd ..`

The `..` is a command-line shortcut to move "up" one folder in a directory tree.
Try `cd`-ing into a few other folders and then returning back to your home
directory to get the hang of moving around.

![cd](./images/4.cd.gif)

###Multiple tab-completions

If there are multiple possible completions for a partial directory name, you can
ask the terminal to display them by hitting TAB twice. Try entering

```Bash
cd Do
```

and then hit TAB twice to see the list of matching directories. Then you can add
a `c` and Tab-complete `Documents`.

![cdtabtab](./images/5.cdtabtab.gif)

##Quick config step

Now that we have a handle on basic terminal navigation, we are going to make a
few tweaks to this setup to make it friendlier. Copy the two lines below by
selecting them and hitting Ctrl+c and then paste them into the terminal using
Ctrl+Shift+v and hit \<Enter\>. **Note** that Ctrl+v doesn't work, you need to
add Shift.

```Bash
echo "export PATH=/opt/anaconda/bin:\$PATH" >> .bashrc
echo "export PS1=\"\u \w \"" >> .bashrc
```

(If you are following along and aren't at GW, don't copy the first line, that
only applies to the GW Linux labs)

Now, to activate the options we just selected, type the following line in the
terminal and hit \<Enter\>

```Bash
source .bashrc
```

It should look a little something like this:

![image](./images/6.bashrc.gif)

##Fire up a jupyter notebook!

It's time to get started! If you're at GW then everything is already installed,
just run

```Bash
jupyter notebook
```

in a terminal and it will launch a notebook server in your browser. If you
*aren't* at GW, then see the next module in Getting Started on installing Python
and Jupyter.
